# Mendelian_Randomization

Mendelian randomization (MR) is an epidemiological method that can be used to provide support for causality between a modifiable exposure/phenotypic trait (termed exposure) and a disease outcome. Two-sample MR is used to provide support for causality between publicly available GWASes used as exposures and the risk of a disease (i.e PD, ALS, DLB...). MR analyses are performed using the MR Base package; [https://github.com/MRCIEU/TwoSampleMR])(Hemani et al., 2017).
Here I used the following stringent criteria for any exposure GWAS to be included in our analysis: (i) the GWAS had to report SNPs with p-values less than 5.0x10-8 for their association with a given exposure; (ii) these SNPs or their proxies (linkage disequilibrium R2 value >= 0.8) had to be present in both the exposure and outcome (PD) datasets; (iii) these SNPs were independent signals that were generated through a process called ‘clumping’. In order to ‘clump’, index SNPs were identified by ranking exposure associations from the smallest to largest p-value (but still with a cutoff value of p=5x10−8). Clumped SNPs were those in linkage disequilibrium (LD) with index SNPs (R2 threshold of 0.001) or within 10,000 kb physical distance.  Hence, each index SNP represented a number of clumped SNPs that were all associated with or near to the index SNP, and the index SNPs were all independent of one another (according to the stringent parameters defined here). Then, we usually expand our filtering approach as follows: (iv) in order to use MR sensitivity analyses designed to identify pleiotropy, each GWAS had to include a minimum of ten associated SNPs; (v) the number of cases was > 250 for GWASes of a binary exposure or > 250 individuals for GWASes of a continuous exposure.
Harmonization is undertaken to rule out strand mismatches and to ensure alignment of SNP effect sizes. Within each exposure GWAS, Wald ratios are calculated for each extracted SNP by dividing the per-allele log-odds ratio (or beta) of that variant in the PD GWAS data by the log-odds ratio (or beta) of the same variant in the exposure data (see 1_MR_Methods_Code.md).
First, the inverse-variance weighted (IVW) method is implemented to examine the relationship between the individual exposures and PD. Effects of pleiotropy for each analysis are studied by first looking for evidence of heterogeneity in the individual SNP Wald ratios and then undertaking a range of sensitivity analyses, each with different underlying assumptions. Heterogeneity in the IVW estimates is tested using the Cochran’s Q test, quantified using the I2 statistic, and displayed in forest plots (see 1_MR_Methods_Code.md). IVW radial analysis are performed as a complementary method to account for SNPs acting as heterogeneous outliers and to determine the effect of resulting bias on the IVW estimate (see 2_Radial.md).
Lasso-based multivariate analysis (see 3_Lasso.md and 4_Multivariate.md) can be used to explore how each related exposure of interest (ie, low-density lipoprotein LDL cholesterol, self-reported cholesterol, and coronary heart disease) independently contribute to the outcome. 
For effect estimate directionality, odds ratios are scaled on a standard deviation increase in genetic risk for the exposure from that population mean. We can evaluate the possibility that the overall estimate was driven by a single SNP using leave-one-out (LOO) analyses for each of the phenotypic traits associated with PD (see 5_LOO.md). Finally, we can test for reverse causation by using SNPs tagging the independent loci described in the latest outcome GWAS as exposure instrumental variables, and exposure GWASes as the outcomes.
